Complete review for the Logging reference guide (#34128)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/logging.adoc

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////

> = Configuration guidance for logging in Quarkus

Author: Hello everybody. Thank you so much for your suggestions and review provided. Before we can merge this, I suggest making a small vote on a better name and abstract so that we will have something you like while being ok with some new heading rules we have had in the Quarkus repo for some time now.

Here are my candidates for the heading.
Since this whole guide is a reference, we need to choose a heading like these:

= Configuration guidance for logging
= Logging configuration methods
= Logging configuration parameters
= Logging configuration

We cant use `Configure`, or `How to configure`, because these would be headings for a Tutorial or HowTo template, not reference. We also can use the word `reference` in the title.

For the abstract:

Here is something that should summarize it well, and yes, it also contains some portal title page "fluff". Why is it there..for searchability (google search results), we need to use some Keywords that help us get needed docs on the radar. I am also for a minimalistic approach.

Now, why we can't use something like this:
"Learn how to perform logging in your Quarkus application and configure logging output."
It is because this is not a guide that should teach you anything.

Here are some ideas. We can also create a combination.
1)
Leverage the available information on logging in Quarkus to configure it according to your specific requirements effectively.

2) Use the available information on logging in Quarkus to configure it efficiently according to your specific requirements.

3)
Use the available information on logging in Quarkus and configuring the logging output accordingly.

4)
Configure logging in your Quarkus applications to determine how data and messages about events are recorded and made available. Use the available information to set the appropriate configuration properties that you need.

Can I have your 2cents on this too?
@dmlloyd @Ladicek @mkouba @michelle-purcell

Reviewer: The guide explains:

1. using logging API(s)
2. logger configuration

I'd just call it "Logging" and be done with it. It is the ultimate logging reference guide after all.

When it comes to the summary, I'll try to distill the absolute gist of it:

> Use the logging API in Quarkus efficiently. Configure logging output according to your needs. Use logging adapters to unify the output from other logging APIs.

I think those are the main topics covered in this reference.

I passionately dislike padding words like "Use available information" (or even "utilize" or "leverage"!), so I'm trying to avoid them myself :-)

    }
}
----
<1> The `io.quarkus.logging.Log` class contains the same methods as JBoss Logging, except that they are `static`.
<2> Note that the class does not declare a logger field.
This is because during application build, a `private static final org.jboss.logging.Logger` field is created automatically in each class that uses the `Log` API.
The fully qualified name of the class that calls the `Log` methods is used as a logger name.
In this example, the logger name would be `com.example.MyService`.
<3> Finally, all calls to `Log` methods are rewritten to regular JBoss Logging calls on the logger field during the application build.

> WARNING: Only use the `Log` API in application classes, not in external dependencies.

Reviewer 2: @Ladicek is this still true? We changed the implementation recently if I'm not mistaken...

Reviewer: The change was only for tests. Non-transformed calls to `Log` will still throw during "production" run.

Reviewer 2: I see.

WARNING:: Same as **WARN**.
CONFIG:: Service configuration information.
FINE:: Same as **DEBUG**.
FINER:: Same as **TRACE**.
FINEST:: Increased debug output compared to `TRACE`, which might have a higher frequency.

.The mapping between the levels
[options="header",cols="^33%,^33%,^33%"]
|===
|Numerical level value |Standard level name |Equivalent `java.util.logging` (JUL) level name

|1100 |FATAL | Not applicable

|1000 |ERROR |SEVERE

|900 |WARN |WARNING

|800 |INFO |INFO

|700 | Not applicable |CONFIG

|500 |DEBUG |FINE

|400 |TRACE |FINER

|300 | Not applicable |FINEST
|===

== Runtime configuration

Runtime logging is configured in the `application.properties` file.

Because JBoss Logging is built-in to Quarkus, link:https://quarkus.io/developer-joy/[unified configuration] is provided for all <<supported-logging-apis,supported logging APIs>>.

.An example of how you can set the default log level to `INFO` logging and include Hibernate `DEBUG` logs:
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.log.level=INFO
quarkus.log.category."org.hibernate".level=DEBUG
----

When you set the log level to below `DEBUG`, you must adjust the minimum log level to one of the following options:

> Directly:: By adjusting the log level directly.

Reviewer: Not sure what this means. This doesn't follow from the previous text. Something like this should be enough:

```asciidoc
When you set the log level to below `DEBUG`, you must also adjust the minimum log level.
This setting is either global, using the `quarkus.log.min-level` configuration property, or per category:

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.log.category."org.hibernate".min-level=TRACE
----

It sets a floor level for which Quarkus needs to generate supporting code.
The minimum log level must be set at build time, so that Quarkus can open the door to optimization opportunities by eliding logging for levels that can never be used.
```

Author: Deluxe, applying :)

Globally::  By setting the `quarkus.log.min-level` property.
Per category:: As shown in the previous example.

The minimum logging level sets a floor level for which Quarkus needs to generate supporting code, potentially opening the door to optimization opportunities by eliding logging for levels that can never be activated.

.An example from native execution:
Setting `INFO` as the minimum logging level sets lower-level checks, such as `isTraceEnabled`, to `false`.
This identifies code like `if(logger.isDebug()) callMethod();` that will never be executed and mark it as "dead."

[WARNING]
====

> If you add these properties by using the command line, ensure the `"` character is always escaped as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you add these properties on the command line, ensure the `"` character is escaped properly:
```

----
 `-Dquarkus.log.category.\"org.hibernate\".level=TRACE`
----
====

All potential properties are listed in the <<loggingConfigurationReference,logging configuration reference>> section.

=== Logging categories

Logging is done on a per-category basis, with each category being configured independently.
A category configuration recursively applies to all subcategories of that category unless there is a more specific matching sub-category configuration.

The parent of all logging categories is called the "root category".
This category, being the ultimate parent, may contain configuration which applies globally to all other categories. This includes the globally configured handlers and formatters.

> Thus, configurations made under `quarkus.log.console.*`, `quarkus.log.file.*`, and `quarkus.log.syslog.*`, are global and apply for all categories. This is described in link:https://quarkus.io/guides/logging#configuration[].

Author: Good catch. Adding.

> If you want to configure something extra for a specific category, create a named handler like `quarkus.log.handler.[console|file|syslog].<your-handler-name>.*` and set it up for that category by using `quarkus.log.category.<my-categories>.handlers`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to configure something extra for a specific category, create a named handler like `quarkus.log.handler.[console|file|syslog].<your-handler-name>.*` and set it up for that category by using `quarkus.log.category.<my-category>.handlers`.
```

   }
}
----
<1> The FQCN of the declaring class is used as a logger name, for example, `org.jboss.logging.Logger.getLogger(SimpleBean.class)` will be used.
<2> In this case, the name _foo_ is used as a logger name, for example,`org.jboss.logging.Logger.getLogger("foo")` will be used.

NOTE: The logger instances are cached internally. Therefore, when a logger is injected, for example, into a `@RequestScoped` bean, it is shared for all bean instances to avoid possible performance penalties associated with logger instantiation.

== Logging levels

.The mapping between the levels
[options="header",cols="^33%,^33%,^33%"]
|===
|The numerical level value |JBoss Logging level |`java.util.logging` (JUL) level

|1100 |FATAL | Not applicable

|1000 |ERROR |SEVERE

|900 |WARN |WARNING

|800 |INFO |INFO

|700 | Not applicable |CONFIG

|500 |DEBUG |FINE

|400 |TRACE |FINER

|300 | Not applicable |FINEST
|===

> * The table does not mention numerically undefined Log4j and SLF4j logging levels because they all map one-to-one with the logging levels JBoss Logging provides of the same name.

Reviewer 3: I'd probably just drop this note altogether; I don't think it answers any question that a user might have.

.Log levels used by Quarkus

[horizontal]
OFF:: A special level to use in configuration in order to turn off logging.
FATAL:: A critical service failure or complete inability to service requests of any kind.
ERROR:: A significant disruption in a request or the inability to service a request.
WARN:: A non-critical service error or problem that may not require immediate correction.
INFO:: Service lifecycle events or important related very low-frequency information.
DEBUG:: Messages that convey extra information regarding lifecycle or non-request-bound events, useful for debugging.
TRACE:: Messages that convey extra per-request debugging information that may be very high frequency.
ALL:: A special level to use in configuration to turn on logging for all messages, including custom levels.

You can also configure the following levels for applications and libraries that use link:https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/logging/Level.html[`java.util.logging`]:

[horizontal]
SEVERE:: Same as **ERROR**.
WARNING:: Same as **WARN**.
CONFIG:: Service configuration information.
FINE:: Same as **DEBUG**.
FINER:: Same as **TRACE**.

> FINEST:: Increased debug output than `TRACE`, which might have a higher frequency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
FINEST:: Increased debug output compared to `TRACE`, which might have a higher frequency.
```

Setting `INFO` as the minimum logging level sets lower-level checks, such as `isTraceEnabled`, to `false`.
This identifies code like `if(logger.isDebug()) callMethod();` that will never be executed and mark it as "dead."

[WARNING]
====
If you add these properties on the command line, ensure the `"` character is escaped properly:

----
 `-Dquarkus.log.category.\"org.hibernate\".level=TRACE`
----
====

All potential properties are listed in the <<loggingConfigurationReference,logging configuration reference>> section.

=== Logging categories

Logging is done on a per-category basis, with each category being configured independently.
A category configuration recursively applies to all subcategories of that category unless there is a more specific matching sub-category configuration.

The parent of all logging categories is called the "root category".
This category, being the ultimate parent, may contain configuration which applies globally to all other categories. This includes the globally configured handlers and formatters.

Thus, configurations made under `quarkus.log.console.*`, `quarkus.log.file.*`, and `quarkus.log.syslog.*`, are global and apply for all categories.

> For more information, see: link:https://quarkus.io/guides/logging#configuration[JSON logging extension configuration].

Author: Yeah, the link was pointing to an unrelated chapter, so my description was wrong.
Thank you for spotting this.

```
Thus, configurations made under `quarkus.log.console.*`, `quarkus.log.file.*`, and `quarkus.log.syslog.*`, are global and apply for all categories. For more information, see <<loggingConfigurationReference>>.
```

   }
}
----
<1> The FQCN of the declaring class is used as a logger name, for example, `org.jboss.logging.Logger.getLogger(SimpleBean.class)` will be used.
<2> In this case, the name _foo_ is used as a logger name, for example,`org.jboss.logging.Logger.getLogger("foo")` will be used.

NOTE: The logger instances are cached internally. Therefore, when a logger is injected, for example, into a `@RequestScoped` bean, it is shared for all bean instances to avoid possible performance penalties associated with logger instantiation.

== Logging levels

.The mapping between the levels
[options="header",cols="^33%,^33%,^33%"]
|===
|The numerical level value |JBoss Logging level |`java.util.logging` (JUL) level

> |1100 |FATAL |Not applicable

Reviewer 3: I think it could be better here to say "No equivalent" or just give a "`-`" like down below.

Author: Thank you, David. Will apply.

|1000 |ERROR |SEVERE

|900 |WARN |WARNING

|800 |INFO |INFO

|700 |- |CONFIG

|500 |DEBUG |FINE

|400 |TRACE |FINER

|300 |- |FINEST
|===
* The table does not mention numerically undefined Log4j/SLF4j logging levels because they all map one-to-one with the logging levels JBoss Logging provides of the same name.

> .Log levels used by Quarkus

Reviewer 3: Much of this information is redundant with respect to the table up above. Is there some way to combine this information?

Author: Yeah, I could add another table column and put it there. Would that be OK in your books, @dmlloyd ?

Author: No, this is not the solution. The table maps the values with the numeric value. The lines bellow are descriptions of these levels. Not seeing much duplication here. :)

Reviewer 3: The section here is titled "Logging levels" but the first thing that is in the section is a table comparing the standard levels to JUL. At the very least, the table should be *after* the description of what the standard levels are and what they mean, and what the JUL levels are.

Reviewer 2: I think that we could just skip the table and keep those two lists ("Log levels used by Quarkus" and `java.util.logging` mapping) because the numerical level value is not very useful... WDYT?

Author: I am for keeping it, but also for the LOG4J and Sl4f note deletion and moving it lover as @dmlloyd suggested.

CONFIG:: Service configuration information.
FINE:: Same as **DEBUG**.
FINER:: Same as **TRACE**.
FINEST:: Even more debugging information than `TRACE`, with maybe even higher frequency.

== Runtime configuration

Runtime logging is configured in the `application.properties` file.

> Quarkus internally employs `jboss-logging` and provides link:https://quarkus.io/developer-joy/[unified configuration] for all <<supported-logging-apis,supported logging APIs>>.

Author: Nice one. Will apply!

.An example of setting the default log level to `INFO` logging and include Hibernate `DEBUG` logs:
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.log.level=INFO
quarkus.log.category."org.hibernate".level=DEBUG
----

> Setting a log level below `DEBUG` requires the minimum log level to be adjusted either:

Reviewer 3: I would add something like "... in order for the log messages to be visible in the log".  The user might not always want TRACE messages to be visible by default.

> * per category, as shown in the previous example

Reviewer 4: Fix capitalization in list. Would a desc list work here too?

```suggestion
Per category :: As shown in the previous example.
```

> * globally, by using the `quarkus.log.min-level` property

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Globally::  By setting the `quarkus.log.min-level` property.
```

> * per category, as shown in the previous example
> * globally, by using the `quarkus.log.min-level` property
> * directly, by adjusting the log level directly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Directly:: By adjusting the log level directly.
```

> The minimum logging level sets a floor level that Quarkus needs to generate, potentially opening the door to optimization opportunities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The minimum logging level sets a floor level for which Quarkus needs to generate supporting code, potentially opening the door to optimization opportunities by eliding logging for levels that can never be activated.
```

.An example from native execution:

> Setting the `INFO` as the minimum logging level sets lower-level checks, such as `isTraceEnabled`, to `false`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Setting `INFO` as the minimum logging level sets lower-level checks, such as `isTraceEnabled`, to `false`.
```

Reviewer 3: I would use even stronger language: "... causes check methods for lower log levels, such as `isTraceEnabled`, to always return a constant `false` value."

----
 `-Dquarkus.log.category.\"org.hibernate\".level=TRACE`
----
====

All potential properties are listed in the <<loggingConfigurationReference,logging configuration reference>> section.

=== Logging categories

Logging is done on a per-category basis, with each category being configured independently.
A category configuration recursively applies to all subcategories of that category unless there is a more specific matching sub-category configuration.

The parent of all logging categories is called the "root category".
This category, being the ultimate parent, may contain configuration which applies globally to all other categories. This includes the globally configured handlers and formatters.

Thus, configurations made under `quarkus.log.console.*`, `quarkus.log.file.*`, and `quarkus.log.syslog.*`, are global and apply for all categories. This is described in link:https://quarkus.io/guides/logging#configuration[].

If you want to configure something extra for a specific category, create a named handler like `quarkus.log.handler.[console|file|syslog].<your-handler-name>.*` and set it up for that category by using `quarkus.log.category.<my-categories>.handlers`.

> //TODO: Add a better, real-world example of a handler configuration for a more specific category. CC DML

Reviewer 3: The handler configuration is down below so *instead* of doing this here, I think that each handler down below (file, console, etc.) should have an example of global and per-category configuration.

Author: I agree. Please, if you can provide me these examples, I will add them there. Or would you rather do it in separate PR when this is merged?

Author: Great, I will star a PR for a minimalistic review of Logging guide includes. I think that will be great opportunity to add these examples.

|quarkus.log.min-level|DEBUG|The default minimum log level for every log category.
|===

> * The enclosing parent category is examined if no level configuration exists for a given logger category.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The parent category is examined if no level configuration exists for a given logger category.
```

===== Configuration

Configure the JSON logging extension using supported properties to customize its behavior.

> include::{generated-dir}/config/quarkus-logging-json.adoc[opts=optional, leveloffset=+1]

Reviewer 4: Does the restructuring and styling in this PR include the included file content? 
Note that this shows up in the preview with some grammatical mistakes.

Author: Hello @michelle-purcell . Yes, I will do that in a separate PR. My goal is to merge this asap as we get some conversation about the heading and abstract.
Before that happens, I will start patching this included files from a new branch.

NOTE: Printing the details can be expensive as the values are retrieved from the caller.
The details include the source class name, source file name, source method name, and source line number.

== Log handlers

A log handler is a logging component responsible for the emission of log events to a recipient.

> Quarkus comes with three different log handlers: **console**, **file**, and **syslog**.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Quarkus includes several different log handlers: **console**, **file**, and **syslog**.
```

=== File log handler

By default, the file log handler in Quarkus is disabled.
Once enabled, it enables the logging of all events to a file on the application's host, while also supporting log file rotation.
Log file rotation ensures effective log file management over time by maintaining a specified number of backup log files, while keeping the primary log file up-to-date and manageable.

For details about its configuration, see the xref:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.file-file-logging[file logging configuration] reference.

=== Syslog log handler

The syslog handler in Quarkus follows the link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syslog[Syslog] protocol, which is used to send log messages on Unix-like systems.
It utilizes the protocol defined in link:https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5424[RFC 5424].

By default, the syslog handler is disabled.
When enabled, it sends all log events to a syslog server, typically the local syslog server for the application.

For details about its configuration, see the xref:#quarkus-log-logging-log-config_quarkus.log.syslog-syslog-logging[Syslog logging configuration] reference.

[NOTE]
====

> Although the root logger's handlers are usually configured directly via `quarkus.log.console`, `quarkus.log.file` and `quarkus.log.syslog`, it can nonetheless have additional named handlers attached to it using the `quarkus.log.handlers` property.

Reviewer: This note probably belongs a bit earlier, it is not specific to the Syslog handler.

Author: Nice one. Moving it to the `=== Root logger configuration` chapter.
Thank you!

<1> Make sure the `org.jboss.logmanager.LogManager` is used.
<2> Enable debug logging for all logging categories.

> For Gradle, add the following configuration to the `build.gradle` XML file:

Reviewer: `build.gradle` is not XML.

```suggestion
For Gradle, add the following configuration to the `build.gradle` file:
```

    <artifactId>slf4j-jboss-logmanager</artifactId>
</dependency>
----
+
[source,gradle,role="secondary asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-gradle"]
.build.gradle
----
implementation("org.jboss.slf4j:slf4j-jboss-logmanager")
----

. Verify whether the logs generated by the added library adhere to the same format as the other Quarkus logs.

[[loggingConfigurationReference]]

> == Logging configuration reference

Reviewer 4: Should this section (and the other big included file with a similar properties list) be on its own reference page, (as per diataxis) and referenced from a how-to? Ignore if this is the plan for a later iteration. Thanks.
